Add a proposal for declarative secrets (#214)
devcontainers/spec: proposals/declarative-secrets.md

# Declarative Secrets

## Motiviation

> Various projects exist in the wild that require various secrets for them to run properly. Exmaples include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various projects exist in the wild that require various secrets for them to run properly. Examples include:
```

- https://github.com/lostintangent/codespaces-langchain
- https://github.com/openai/openai-quickstart-python
- https://github.com/openai/openai-quickstart-node

Today these projects have to include specific instructions e.g. in their README telling users where to procure what they need to run and then how to set it up as a secret or add it as an environment variable. This currently acts as an impediment to adoption and promotion of dev containers for these projects.

## Goal

Simplify using dev containers for these kinds of projects by supporting secrets as a first-class part of the dev container creation flow.

## Proposal

> Add an optional `secrets` to the `devContainer.base.schema.json`. This will be used to declare the secrets needed within the dev container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add an optional `secrets` property to the `devContainer.base.schema.json`. This will be used to declare the secrets needed within the dev container.
```

Property | Type | Description
--- | --- | ---
`secrets` | `object` | The keys of this object are the names of the secrets that are in use. Keys should be [valid Linux environment variable names](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/000095399/basedefs/xbd_chap08.html).

The `secrets` property contains a map of secret names and details about those secrets. These `secrets` are recommended to the user but are not _required_ for creation. All properties are optional.

Property | Type | Description
--- | --- | ---
`description` | `string` | A brief description of the secret.
`documentationUrl` | `string` | A URL pointing to where the user can obtain more information about the secret. For example where to find docs on provisioning an API key for a service.

## Example

```json
{
    "image": "mcr.microsoft.com/devcontainers/base:bullseye",
    "secrets": {
        "CHAT_GPT_API_KEY": {
            "description": "I'm your super cool API key for ChatGPT.",
            "documentationUrl": "https://openai.com/api/"
        },
        "STABLE_DIFFUSION_API_KEY": {}
    }
}
```

> This example would declare that this dev container wants the user to provide two secrets. The `CHAT_GPT_API_KEY` secret also provides some additional metadata that clients can use in displaying a user experience to provide that secret. The `STABLE_DIFFUSION_API_KEY` skips that metadata.

Reviewer 2: "some additional metadata" means the documentation URL the user can navigate to with the browser or is there anything in addition to that?

Author: The `description` and `documentationUrl`, yes. It's up to implementations to decide if and how to make use of this metadata.

> Implementations _may_ inject these secrets into the container as environment variables.

Reviewer 2: To ensure that the same devcontainer.json will result in a functioning dev container with all implementations, shouldn't we _require_ implementations to inject the secrets as environment variables?

Author: I think what this is trying to recognize and call out is that there may be other types of secrets later (not addressed here as mentioned towards the bottom) that would be injected differently and/or not injected at all. This document is implicitly assuming a default value for this TBD future `"type"` property of "environment" but trying to avoid calling that out since I'm not trying to address that possible future inclusion.

FWIW this was originally worded as this but was changed in response to this earlier PR feedback https://github.com/devcontainers/spec/pull/214#discussion_r1139038674
>These secrets would, by default, be injected into the container as environment variables.

Reviewer 2: "by default" would cover the absence of "type" for me, but we can clarify later if you prefer.

# Declarative Secrets

## Motiviation

Various projects exist in the wild that require various secrets for them to run properly. Exmaples include:

- https://github.com/lostintangent/codespaces-langchain
- https://github.com/openai/openai-quickstart-python
- https://github.com/openai/openai-quickstart-node

Today these projects have to include specific instructions e.g. in their README telling users where to procure what they need to run and then how to set it up as a secret or add it as an environment variable. This currently acts as an impediment to adoption and promotion of codespaces for these projects.

## Goal

Simplify using codespaces for these kinds of projects by including it as a first-class part of the codespace creation flow.

## Proposal

> Add an optional `secrets` to the `devContainer.base.schema.json`. This will be used to declare the secrets needed within the devcontainer.

Reviewer: nit: We refer to them as 2 words "dev containers," so would be great to update here and any others spots in the doc 😄

Property | Type | Description
--- | --- | ---

> `secrets` | `object` | The keys of this object are the names of the secrets that are in use.

Reviewer 3: Should we note here the shape of what a key in this map should look like?

Since implementations of this will likely source these key as environment variables, I think it would make sense to align with what a valid env variable key looks like (in unix-like systems): https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2821043/allowed-characters-in-linux-environment-variable-names#2821183

The `secrets` property contains a map of secret names and details about those secrets. These `secrets` are recommended to the user but are not _required_ for creation. All properties are optional.

Property | Type | Description
--- | --- | ---
`description` | `string` | A brief description of the secret.
`documentationUrl` | `string` | A URL pointing to where the user can obtain more information about the secret. For example where to find docs on provisioning an API key for a service.

## Example

```json
{
    "image": "mcr.microsoft.com/devcontainers/base:bullseye",
    "secrets": {
        "CHAT_GPT_API_KEY": {
            "description": "I'm your super cool API key for ChatGPT.",
            "documentationUrl": "https://openai.com/api/"
        },
        "STABLE_DIFFUSION_API_KEY": {}
    }
}
```

> This example would declare that this devcontainer wants the user to provide two secrets. The `CHAT_GPT_API_KEY` secret also provides some additional metadata that clients can use in displaying a user experience to provide that secret. The `STABLE_DIFFUSION_API_KEY` skips that metadata.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This example would declare that this dev container wants the user to provide two secrets. The `CHAT_GPT_API_KEY` secret also provides some additional metadata that clients can use in displaying a user experience to provide that secret. The `STABLE_DIFFUSION_API_KEY` skips that metadata.
```

> These secrets would, by default, be injected into the container as environment variables.

Reviewer 3: Not sure if this is necessary to state? Could be convinced otherwise but this sounds like an implementation detail.

For codespaces specifically we will prompt the user for this information as part of creating their codespace. The `description` and `documentationUrl` are leveraged in the UI to provide context to the user about the secret. As mentioned above the secrets would be _optional_ as part of creating a codespace.

## Possible Future Extensions

These are **out of scope** for this proposal but the following has been discussed in relation:

1. Inclusion of a `type` field per secret. The default, which we are assuming and leveraging here, would be `"environmentVariable"`. This would include an option to specify `"reference"` and then reference the provided secrets in other parts of the devcontainer.

> 2. Prescriptions of _how_ the secrets are injected into the devcontainer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Prescriptions of _how_ the secrets are injected into the dev container.
```
